---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Redefining Privacy for the Internet
author: Jeff
author_login: admin
author_email: jeff@allthingsdork.com
author_url: http://www.allthingsdork.com
wordpress_id: 645
wordpress_url: http://www.allthingsdork.com/?p=645
date: '2010-06-13 09:08:05 -0500'
date_gmt: '2010-06-13 15:08:05 -0500'
categories:
- Random
tags:
- Internet
- Facebook
- privacy
comments: []
---
<p>I'm not sure when the modern interpretation of privacy began, but it has definitely gained momentum in this new age of social networking. Mainstream news, the blogosphere and the twitterverse are constantly buzzing with the latest egregious privacy violations by companies, most notably Facebook. Many people are up in arms about the way the company conducts their business, turning your personal information into the essential ingredients of a revenue stream. But the reality is that privacy is mostly a modern invention and because of that the essence of its definition is still in debate. But I posit that a person can't really care about privacy and be a member of these social networks in the first place. It's not the thought of our privacy being violated, but our lack of understand of what people will do with that information.</p>
<p>The Internet has become a soapbox for most people, yours truly included. We broadcast our information to a community of listeners who offer feedback and their own series of updates. It's the core of social networking. But we go through great lengths to control who can see that information. Menus upon menus of security screens and so called "privacy" settings allow us to tweak who our message is delivered to. With those privacy controls in mind, we can lose our "social filters", the things we wouldn't normally say aloud in a crowded room. Our true thoughts about our boss, disappointment in our loved ones and the embarrassing tidbits about your bowel movements are all fair game, thanks to privacy settings. But privacy from whom?</p>
<p>The moment we submit our information to the ether, it is stored and cataloged in a database in an unknown location, in an unknown format, accessible to an unknown tribe of people. The "security" that we discuss applies only to people using the application. Database admins have access to our data. Systems Analyst have access to our data. We give complete strangers access to our private messages that contain some of our most intimate details of life. For a lot of people, those messages contain the real you, not the you that is projected to society. We do this with complete freedom because....? Because we're not connected to those strangers in anyway. They exist the same way God exists for some of us, an invisible overseer who is watching but isn't judgmental. You risk your private moments because you feel safe in the assumption that the overseer has no use for it. Therefore it makes sense to say that privacy, as is commonly defined, isn't your concern. Let's change the scenario.</p>
<p>Instead of the invisible overseer being a nameless, faceless entity, let's give him or her an identity. A distant cousin of your significant other works at Facebook. They don't talk often, so its not like they share a relationship or anything. But does your use of the application change? Of course it does. Sending a private message via Facebook about something you don't want your partner to know is no longer a safe means of communication. Even if it's something as innocuous as planning a surprise birthday party. It's not that the person has the information, it's more the concern of what they're going to do with it. Are they going to tell your partner? Might they hold it over your head? Post it on their own wall? The possibilities are endless, but more importantly they're out of your control. Someone now has power over you because of the information they hold about you. It's not the fact that they have it, it's the unknown of what they'll do with it. You may think this example is unfair, because we know the person in question. So we'll again change the scenario.</p>
<p>Facebook is an ad supported service (like everything else around us). They make their money serving targeted ads based on information you provide them. This arrangement is buried inside the <a href="http://www.facebook.com/terms.php">terms of service</a>, but most of us don't have the time or the education to read and comprehend it. We click "I Agree" blindly and just make the assumption that nothing nefarious is going on. As long as the data stays inside Facebook, we're OK because whatever happens should be visibly apparent in my user experience. But when word gets out that Facebook is selling that information, then suddenly we get up in arms. All faceless entities are not equal. But what does the common user of Facebook base their trust of the company on? For most people, just the volume of active users is enough of an endorsement as to their trustworthiness. Most users would be surprised to learn <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_Facebook">just how untrustworthy Facebook</a> has been in the past. We have an inherited trust of the company from other people we know. I trust Bob, Bob trusts Facebook, so Facebook must be trustworthy. We trust that Facebook won't do anything bad with the information we give them. But if Facebook is selling the information to company B, then we have an issue. We don't have that inherited trust with company B and we have no idea what company B intends to do with that data. Again it's a faceless entity though. Why would they have any more use for my cooking recipes than Facebook? Why do I care that company B knows I have an embarrassing love for The Real Housewives of New Jersey? It's not the possession of the information that scares us, it's the usage of it.</p>
<p>With that said, you'd think as a community of users we'd be more interested in terms of service documents. What exactly are we agreeing to when we use these social networks? For many it would probably help to assuage the fears of providing information, if we in fact knew exactly what it would be used for. You'll tell a total stranger at an insurance office what your social security number is, but if your brother asked you you'd immediately ask why. The intent of the information is clear in the former, but not apparently clear in the latter. Privacy isn't about giving the information out, it's about knowing the intended use of it. This information is spelled out in almost every service offered. We simply need to start taking the time to read it.</p>
<p>What are you agreeing to in the Facebook terms of service? Twitter? Google? More importantly ask yourself, what are you agreeing to by not knowing?</p>
